It's cold outside...
Woman:
Like most adults,
I've never met a child
that I didn't think was full
of tremendous potential.
And that's
our secret way!
Woman:
The question is, what aspects
of the environment are
invested in the child
being strong, resilient,
confident and capable?
...four, five, six...
Woman:
What worries me the most
is that I see many instances
where a child has been let down
by the fragility
and inconsistencies
of their environment.
Have we decided that we're OK
with the fragility
of this system?
The fact that
it's gonna fail kids.
Isn't the investment, early,
in the lives of all children
the long-term investment
in our social well-being
and success as a society?
Narrator:
To imagine how the
will do tomorrow,
we need only ask
how its children
are doing today.
International data
sounds a warning.
Across multiple dimensions,
the well-being of our children
ranks 26 out of 29 nations.
It all begins in infancy.
Boy:
A baby has a brain!
We all have brains!
They make you think...
make you talk...
Girl:
Shelf!
Boy:
Make you walk...
Here! Come on...
Man:
The development of the brain
is laid down
in the early years
well before children
start school,
even before they start talking.
Everything starts
from the bottom-up.
The base holds everything up.
Man:
If we don't do it right early,
it's harder later.
We pay more for it later,
and we don't get as good
an outcome.
Narrator:
40% of our five year olds
are not ready to learn when
they enter kindergarten.
75% of all young adults are not
qualified for military service.
n 1970, the US ranked first
in high school and college
graduation rates.
Today we've fallen to 23rd
in high school graduation,
19th in college graduation.
Man:
We say we're a country
that care about children.
We may care
in some abstract way
but we won't structure
our economy and our systems
to actually support them.
Woman:
The damage
to our youngest children
is just incalculable,
and the costs to society
therefore are incalculable.
Man:
These children right now
are three and four,
are going to be 23 and 24
in 20 years.
It's not that far away.
So yes, we have a crisis,
but we have an opportunity
at the same time.
Woman:
As a society,
we have the potential
to do so much more
than we realize we could do
to support children.
We can win by thinking
as a larger village.
(loudspeaker)
Narrator:
Dr. Renee Boynton-Jarrett
is a pediatrician and researcher
at Boston Medical Center.
Dr. Renee,
look at my socks!
Pretty scary!
How are things going
at home
with raising
two little ones?
They're just
growing too fast.
Every day something new...
Absolutely, I love it.
Aiden, thinking he's the boss.
So he's the big brother...
Narrator:
Dr. Boynton-Jarrett
has supported
four-year-old Aiden
and three-year-old Cara's
development since infancy...
...very age-appropriate...
Narrator:
...as she has
hundreds of children.
Boynton-Jarrett:
We as a society
value productivity;
we value engagement
and civic participation.
We value education.
This is an amazing picture.
Boynton-Jarrett:
Often the work that we do
to support those outcomes
occurs very far out
from the time in life
that is laying the foundation
for achieving those outcomes.
One, two, three, four...
Boynton-Jarrett:
If we look
at the actual
scientific literature,
what predicts high school
graduation rate?
Third grade reading level is
actually a very strong predictor
of high school graduation.
Well, third grade reading level
is predicted by the number
of words you know
when you're two
or three years old.
Urn, they're dancing...
Boynton-Jarrett:
So what predicts the number
of words you know when
you're two or three years old?
Was he jumping on the bed?
Boynton-Jarrett:
We can track that back
to the enrichment
of your environment
at the very earliest moments
of your life...
the very earliest stages
of your brain development.
Say, cheese!
Cheese!
Narrator:
More than 80 billion
brain cells.
That's how many
a baby is born with.
But it's the connections
between cells that matter.
And most connections
are not yet formed at birth.
Man:
Beginning from
the moment of birth,
new synapses or connections
between brain cells are being
formed every single second
in all parts of the brain
that are responsible
for everything from being able
to regulate your feelings,
to begin to learn language...
(baby vocalizes)
Oh, yeah?
Talking to daddy!
...to begin to understand
how to interact
with other children,
to begin to solve problems...
She's thinking to herself,
"How do I get it?"
Shonkoff:
Connections that basically
become the architecture
and the foundation
of who we are as people.
Narrator:
Johely is four months old.
By the time she is three,
her brain will have built
trillions more connections
than all the stars
in our galaxy.
Those intricate circuits
start getting paved
into wider, stronger highways,
building the foundation
for more complex skills
like reasoning, impulse control,
even compassion and trust.
How do we play, huh?
Narrator:
But Joheiys brain connections
aren't built on automatic pilot.
Boynton-Jarrett:
They are reinforced
by characteristics
of your environment.
(speaking Spanish)
She pay attention
to everything you do...
everything you do.
Boynton-Jarrett:
They are reinforced
by experiences
that you have.
Narrator:
Especially through
the exchange of small
everyday interactions
between an infant
and her caregiver.
You happy, eh?
Narrator:
One type of exchange,
called "serve and return,"
is crucial.
You are the most
important people
in her world right now.
Boynton-Jarrett:
"Serve and return"
is a very powerful interaction
on a biological level.
I see this in clinic
all the time.
It's really an amazing
thing to watch.
I'm talking with the parent
and to get the parent's
attention,
the child babbles...
(baby vocalizes)
Boynton-Jarrett:
And the parent turns from
and begins to smile at the child
and encourage them,
say something to them,
the child smiles back
at the parent.
And the child will be delighted
because they've succeeded.
They've captured the attention
of their parent.
They've gotten this wonderful
engagement
that's reinforcing the way in
which the child is developing.
And the more practice you have
at activating those circuits,
the stronger they become.
It's a use-it or lose-it
phenomenon.
Narrator:
But what happens
when a baby doesn't
have that practice,
when "serve and return"
is limited
or disrupted or withdrawn?
Mommy's right here.
Oh, yes!
Narrator:
We can see one important
response in the classic
Still Face Experiment
first conducted by Professor
Ed Tronick and colleagues.
Everything new in the room
and she uses it as a way...
Tronick:
In the Still Face Experiment,
what the mother did
was she sits down
and she's playing with her baby.
Yay, so good!
Tronick:
And then we asked the mother
to not respond to the baby.
The baby very quickly
picks up on this.
(baby vocalizes)
And then she uses
all of her abilities
to try and get the mother back.
(baby screams)
Shonkoff:
I can guarantee you
that baby was not given a course
in child development.
That baby was not told,
"If you don't get good response,
do everything you can
to indicate distress."
Babies pick upon that
right away
because their brains are wired
to expect responsiveness.
(baby vocalizes)
At a moment that a baby
is not getting responsiveness,
that is triggering
a stress response.
Automatically, instantly
our heart rate goes up,
our blood pressure goes up,
our blood sugar goes up,
our inflammatory system
is activated.
It's the basis of the fight
or flight syndrome.
It's life-preserving.
Narrator:
When the threat has passed
and a baby feels safe, secure,
and nurtured again,
her stress reaction
returns to normal.
Shonkoff:
The problem is the chronic
repeated activation
of that stress system
takes allot these
physiological changes
and over time instead
of being helpful,
they start to have a wear-
and-tear effect on your body.
(baby cries)
The parts of the brain
that early on
are associated with memory
and simple learning,
focusing attention, being able
to solve problems.
Those parts of the brain are
very vulnerable to disruption
from chronic activation
of the stress system.
Narrator:
In the Still Face Experiment,
unresponsiveness
was temporary.
No harm done.
(baby cries)
Some stress even promotes
healthy coping skills.
Shonkoff:
The last thing that I would want
to communicate here to parents
is that they're doing harm
to their children.
No, they're not doing harm
to their children,
if in the midst of all that
there's a fair amount
of supportive responsiveness.
And what are you doing?
Narrator:
Which is what
this mother restores and what
most parents try to sustain...
I love you.
Narrator:
That's if they can...
in the midst of the mounting
demands and stressors
on their daily lives.
Boynton-Jarrett:
The stressors in the lives
of parents affect attachment,
they affect the ability to
engage in "serve and return,"
they affect the ability
to provide
and meet allot the needs
of the child.
Woman:
It's hard to make
everything work.
You feel pulled
in all different directions.
Woman:
There's this feeling
of constantly being on
a tense, full alert.
It's too much.
I can't do it.
Feeling security...
I don't really know
what that feels like.
(screaming)
Narrator:
Parents and caregivers
are scrambling to fulfill
their responsibilities
in a society that's unresponsive
to family needs.
Man:
We've made public problems
into private problems,
without resources.
So you have to fix
everything yourself.
Woman:
Funding was cut.
We had to close two
or three classrooms.
And so we have parents
who are strapped for time,
for money, for resources.
Man:
My position
was transferred overseas.
We didn't have any income.
That's any parent's
worst nightmare.
Narrator:
Thirty-five years ago,
wages were rising in tandem
with productivity,
but since then-while labor
productivity continued to rise -
the gains of that productivity
have been shared less and
less with average Americans.
Woman:
He got called in last night
to pick up another shift
and we need the money.
Narrator:
Over the last 40 years,
corporate profits reached
record highs.
Middle class wages
have remained stagnant.
The value of the federal
minimum wage
has actually fallen.
You can't survive
on minimum wage
and take care of two kids.
It's just not possible.
Narrator:
As wages for most
and the cost of education
increased eight-fold.
Young girl:
Sometimes she cries
and she's stuck
and she needs somebody
to help her.
Man:
Parents.
They're the beginning
of the process.
We do not invest enough
in parents.
I'm Rob Dugger.
I'm a partner in a...
Narrator:
Rob Dugger is an economist
and for 15 years,
was a partner in a multi-billion
dollar hedge fund.
Today he's dedicated
to persuading policymakers
and business leaders
to improve conditions for young
children and their families.
Dugger:
When you invest in all kids,
all families, you get on
a higher growth path -
a growth path which provides
more opportunity,
more revenues and enables
a sustainable economy
to generate the kind of jobs
and growth that we need.
Narrator:
Like Dugger, Art Rolnick
and a handful of other
leading economists
have calculated the many
benefits the nation would enjoy
if its policies assured every
child a strong start.
Rolnick:
The kids were more likely
to be literate
by the third grade,
graduate high school, get a job,
pay taxes, stay off welfare,
and the crime rate between
the two groups goes down 50%.
Narrator:
They're zeroing in
on America's family policies.
Dugger:
policies actually
actively discourage parents
from being able to take care
of their children
when they're very young.
They may instinctively
want to do it,
but we don't make it
easy for them.
That way!
No, you silly girl!
That's not the way we go,
we go this way.
Narrator:
Ann lives in Boston.
She gave birth to little Syl
just four months ago.
Can you reach it?
Narrator:
She faced the same difficulty
most American parents face
from the moment
their baby is born.
Ann:
There was no
paid maternity leave,
but I'm allowed to use sick
and vacation time
to get pay while I'm out.
There's no pay just for being
on maternity leave.
Hey, are you awake now?
Narrator:
Every major economy
on the planet
guarantees paid maternity
or family leave,
except the United States.
The result?
40% of new mothers
return to work
by the time their infants
are only three months old-
some because they want to,
most because they have to.
There you go!
What's that?
Who are all these people?
Narrator:
This is little Sylvie's
first day in child care.
She will be here for eight hours
until Ann returns from work.
Here we go, sweetie.
Ann:
I'm going to miss my baby.
I'm a little bit more of a human
being in this last month
so I get to actually be awake
and aware of the fact
that I've got this amazing
little thing
who's starting to smile,
and giggle, and coo.
I'd love to spend
more time with her.
It's just phenomenal to see
every day something changes
and something's different
that she couldn't do before.
Or we notice that she's crying
in a different way now,
that it's louder
and her coos are,
they sound different than
they did a week ago.
And what does that mean?
I don't know,
is that vocal chords?
Is that something different?
But it's exciting to see her
do something more every time.
So you can just her little brain
working, "What? Oh, ooh!"
As a mother,
it's the little things
that make you go, "Oh, yay!"
Narrator:
If Ann lived 250 miles north
in Quebec, Canada,
she and her husband could
share 9 months of paid leave;
in Germany, 14 months;
in Hungary, more than 2 years.
With the exception
of three states,
parents in the US are
guaranteed only 12 weeks
of unpaid family leave,
and then only if a parent
has worked for a company
of 50 or more employees
for at least a year.
Even these benefits
were hard won...
the result of a 9-year battle
waged by family advocates,
beginning in the 1980s.
At the time, the number
of mothers
with young children in the
workforce was soaring.
But in most states,
a woman could be fired
if she took time off
to have a baby.
Woman:
Newborns need their parents
and their parents
need their jobs...
We see the effects of stress
on the mental health
of family members...
They face job loss, soaring
health insurance costs...
Narrator:
Family advocates proposed
only unpaid leave.
Woman:
We eliminated the idea
of going for paid leave,
not because none of us
wanted paid leave;
but because it was so beyond
what people thought politically,
realistically we could get.
Narrator:
But even the idea
of unpaid leave
brought fierce opposition
from the business community
and its political supporters.
Man:
Don't force the benefits
down our throat
or theirs.
I am not opposed to babies
or mothers or fathers.
The real issue here is whether
the programs described
should be federally mandated.
This very bill,
this mandated bill,
will impose such costs
on American business
that it will render them even
more unable to compete
in the world economy.
We were going to bring down
the free enterprise system
as you know it.
We were going
to end capitalism.
I can show you the same quotes
when we talked about legislation
to ban child labor,
to establish a minimum
The sky will fall.
It will kill jobs.
Narrator:
Twice the Family
and Medical Leave Act,
or FMLA,
was passed by Congress.
Twice it went down
to presidential veto.
The objection?
Government intrusion in the
so-called private business...
of business.
Dugger:
The most powerful
political voice
in the United States
is the American
business community.
Without question.
Always has been.
Most of corporate America
is short-term decision-making
because the bottom line
gets converted immediately
into profits
that gets immediately
converted into stock price,
translated immediately
into values
of tens of thousands
of stockholders.
a consequence of the
of short-termism
that is pervading our economy,
pervading our politics,
we are opting to make the wrong
decisions very consistently.
The wrong decisions
for the lifetime success
of our American kids.
(applause)
This is a very poignant moment
and my heart is very full...
Narrator:
Congress passed the FMLA
a third time
and it was finally signed
into law in 1993.
Even its advocates
were disappointed.
Bravo:
First of all,
half the workforce isn't covered
by the Family
and Medical Leave Act.
And most of all, it's unpaid!
So every year you have
nearly three million people
who are eligible for family
and medical leave
and can't afford to take it.
You have a good day,
little one!
Woman:
When you understand that
those first few months
or that first year of life
when the mother needs
to provide
that very sensitive caretaking,
to not provide with policy
what women need to choose
how to do that for themselves
is saying that you're gonna not
pay careful enough attention
to these children.
Boynton-Jarrett:
Is this a safe world?
What will happen
when I feel afraid?
when I feel hungry?
What will happen
when I feel scared?
Can I count on you?
Stressors that a parent
may feel
that they do not have
adequate resources
to buffer or cope with can be
experienced by the child
or influence
the child's well-being.
Essex:
There's no doubt
about the fact that
if a parent is stressed,
that it affects the child.
There's no doubt about that.
We're talking
about processes here
that are at a biological level.
Narrator:
How could parental stress
during pregnancy
and the first years of life
leave a lasting biological
imprint on a child?
That's the question
Professor Marilyn Essex
and dozens of colleagues
at the University
of Wisconsin-Madison
have been asking in a
ground-breaking 20-year study.
Essex:
Our basic hypothesis
was women needing
to go back to work
for financial reasons sooner
than they were ready
was not good for either them
or their families
or the babies.
Narrator:
The study recruited
more than 500
expectant parents,
mostly white
and mostly middle class.
By the time the babies
were four months old,
data showed a pattern
starting to emerge.
Essex:
They were stressed.
They were stressed
economically,
they were stressed
by having to work two jobs.
That's when they showed
a lot less
of that kind of sensitive
and contingent behavior
that is really, really important
for moms
to show with their babies
to have healthy babies.
Narrator:
When the children
were two years old,
the study widened its lens.
Essex:
We began to turn our attention
to say now let's look
at longer-term effects
on the child.
But we broadened it to say,
let's look at stress
more generally.
Woman:
The things that we tapped
were financial stress.
We also look at role overload.
One of the big issues is time
and making sure you have time
with your children
and the resources to give
your children a good life.
Narrator:
Would early life parental stress
continue to have an impact
on the parents' children
as they grew up?
To find out,
the Wisconsin team measured
the presence of Cortisol
in the children's saliva
when they were four.
We do have a freezer full
of saliva samples.
That's pretty
Essex:
We had what we called
"family spit times"
where the mom, the dad,
and the child,
they would spit at the end
of the day.
And the kids thought
this was a lot of fun.
Narrator:
Cortisol is a powerful hormone
whose presence in saliva
indicates activation
of the stress response.
Burgh y:
What we see is
that when moms are reporting
a high level of stress
in the first year of life...
as their child gets older,
if we look at their Cortisol
late in the day,
we see that they have
higher Cortisol levels.
Essex:
And then those kids
with the higher levels
of the stress hormone
had more difficulties
adjusting to school.
(baby cries)
They tended to be
more anxious...
Come on, Buddy,
let's come...
Essex:
...kind of withdraw.
They tended also to be
more impulsive;
they tended to be
more aggressive.
They had a wide variety
of behavior problems.
Narrator:
Another fourteen years
of evaluations, videotaping,
and testing followed.
...from the preschool
through first grade.
In the file cabinets
are the records
from the third grade
through middle school.
We're going to run
a short localizer scan now...
Narrator:
Recently, new neuro-imaging
technology enabled
the Wisconsin team
to see whether or not
parental stress might impact
the very architecture
of their adolescent
children's brains.
The team especially
wanted to look
at one critical brain circuit-
the connection between the
amygdala and prefrontal cortex.
The amygdala recognizes
threat and sounds the alarm.
In turn, the prefrontal cortex
signals the amygdala
whether the alarm is justified.
Burgh y:
We want to see a good flow
of traffic on that highway
because that's a highway
that's helping that child
regulate their emotion on
a moment-to-moment basis -
how to deal with emotions,
when is it appropriate
to express emotions,
what are good things to feel,
what are bad things to feel.
So we can get right
in the middle
of the amygdala there.
That looks fantastic.
Narrator:
So, was there a difference
in these two parts of the brain
in those adolescents
who had experienced
early-life parental stress?
(machine beeps loudly)
Burgh y:
When we look at it now
that they're 18 years old,
we see lower connectivity
between the amygdala
and prefrontal cortex.
Essex:
For the kids
with early stress exposure,
it was just way out of whack.
What we found was a pattern
that absolutely fits
with the rest of our data.
Burgh y:
It was an amazing thing to see
and to see such strong
associations throughout.
And this whole pattern
then predicted anxiety
in these adolescent girls.
It really is setting up a system
that responds differently
to stress in the future.
Burgh y:
When we're stressed out,
we're not taking in
as much information;
we're not functioning
as well in our daily lives.
We might be getting
everything done
but maybe we're not
learning as well.
Essex:
And so it does have an effect
on later achievement
and academic outcomes.
In terms of health
and functioning,
we know that they do worse
than kids who are less stressed.
Narrator:
And the ball can keep bouncing.
These adolescents
are America's future parents.
Essex:
For the girls in our study
who have been exposed
to a lot of early life stress
and who have some kind
of dysregulation
in their stress response system,
that prenatal environment
for their child
is going to be different
and puts that child at risk.
Then that continues generation
after generation.
Ok, you gotta wait
until I'm done.
Oh, the rice isn't done.
Narrator:
Fast on the heels
of their child's birth,
parents confront
another stressful obstacle...
Alright, Naham, we're coming!
Narrator:
...the lack of quality,
affordable childcare.
Man:
We were first looking
at daycare when
Yaminette was pregnant.
For over a year...
Narrator:
Of forty-five nations,
the United States ranks 31st
in availability of childcare,
16th in affordability,
and most alarmingly for
our children's development,
22nd in quality.
I love you, brother!
Narrator:
Yaminette and David
are just starting life
as a family,
raising their son Naham
and daughter Nikha.
Naham:
...trying to find it...
Yaminette:
Tomorrow's a hectic day.
I have a training.
I have to be there at 9 o'clock.
Narrator:
Yaminette works full-time
and more...
Yaminette:
I bring work home with me.
It's just what I do so that
I don't feel as overwhelmed.
You need a fruit, Naham.
Raspberries?
Narrator:
David is on a fast track
to finishing his education.
Yaminette:
I'm the breadwinner.
I'm the sugar mama.
Hi, honey!
Are you ready to try
something new?
David:
The clock is ticking.
The clock's ticking because
your bank account's running low,
the clock's ticking because
you gotta build your career,
but also,
once you have kids,
you really want to invest
in those early years,
you don't want to treat
that time cheaply.
Narrator:
Most parents don't want
to think of their
baby's well-being
in terms of dollars,
but how can they not?
Nationwide, center-based
childcare generally averages
more than $10,000
a year per child.
Yaminette:
With Naham, our first,
we've consistently paid more
for childcare than for rent.
Oh, yeah.
Yaminette:
With Nikha,
my name's on the waiting
list at two places.
For Ellis, we were told
we're around number 40.
I'm really, really holding out
for Ellis.
Narrator:
Ellis is Ellis Memorial
Child Development Center -
one of Boston's best
and most affordable.
Where's Henry?
There's Henry!
Narrator:
Demand for a spot here is high.
Woman:
This is our wait list
and this is the waitlist
just for infants and toddlers.
It's that crazy,
but it's a different world
that we live in.
They have to get to work.
Woman:
Now you guys are going to think
about what
you're thankful for.
Cyanne, do you want
to share?
You don't have to
if you don't want to.
That's okay.
Narrator:
Ellis provides nurturing,
child-centered care
by skilled teachers,
like Aiyauna Terry.
Would you like to share?
Go ahead, Lilly,
what are you thankful for?
My mommy and my daddy...
Terry:
That future inventor,
doctor, nurse,
whatever this child could be,
now is the time that
their brains are at work.
And can you tell him
where the road is
to take you?
It's gonna take you to Boston
all the way down here.
Narrator:
Teachers are
rigorously evaluated.
Ellis is safe, clean,
and offers a stimulating
environment for the early years.
It's not only licensed,
it's nationally accredited.
(pretends to scream)
(children laugh)
Heckman:
Childcare can't be
some kind of warehouse,
because it's more than
just taking care of the child
for eight hours a day.
I need to find a wig for that.
Should I wear a curly wig?
Heckman:
Quality early childhood program
is an opportunity to invest
in the child
and to promote
the capabilities of the child.
Woman:
Who are you?
Fireman!
Narrator:
Studies by Heckman, Art Rolnick,
and others show that children
who receive high quality care
are on average better educated,
healthier, more productive,
and earn higher pay...
Fire! Fire!
Oh, where is there a fire?
Way over there!
Narrator:
...While lowering the cost
to society of unemployment,
social services, health care,
and incarceration.
Heckman:
These kids actually have
what economists call
a rate of return.
For each dollar invested,
you get back 7% to 10%,
somewhere between 7%
and 10% per annum
over the lifetime of the child.
Which is a huge rate of return.
In the US stock market,
a good portfolio,
an average portfolio
would earn about 6% a year.
if you were a financial
planner, investor,
or if you were a government
or somebody asking,
"Where should I put my money?
In the stock market
or in a young child?"
You'd say in a young child.
Narrator:
But that's not where the nation
is investing.
Across the country,
only one in 10 childcare centers
is accredited.
n California,
cemeteries are inspected more
often than childcare centers.
Staff training is often not
required and oversight is lax.
The annual median wage
for American's childcare workers
in 2013 was only $19,600-
less than poverty level
for a family of three.
Are your dinosaurs
joining us?
Yaminette:
The backup plan is
to get into Ellis.
And if, come September,
that doesn't work out,
then David and I will figure
something else out...
Stack 'em up for her.
One, two...
Narrator:
Yaminette and David,
and millions
of American parents,
would not have to
“figure something else out”
if the nation had done
what it was on the verge
of doing almost 45 years ago.
Back in 1971,
Congress passed legislation
called the Comprehensive Child
Development Act or CCDA.
It offered universal, high
quality childcare, preschool,
and other services for children
from birth to age five
to any and every American
family that wanted them.
The legislation awaited
only a presidential signature
to become law.
Reporter:
The word is now
that the Administration
will announce
its position next week.
And the day of daycare may
be approaching in America.
Narrator:
But opponents recast the bill
as government intrusion
into the individual rights and
responsibilities of the family.
And at the 11th hour,
President Nixon
vetoed the bill.
Since the veto,
millions of families have gone
without the kind of quality,
affordable care
all young children need
to flourish.
But one of America's
largest employers
does receive federal funding
to provide high quality,
affordable childcare
to its employees' families.
It regards that care as
a top organizational priority.
Man:
The most important thing to us
is always that our families
are taken care of.
If our families
are taken care of,
there's a sense
of security out there
that we don't have to worry
about them
and we can concentrate
on the mission.
(engine roar)
Narrator:
Here at Camp Pendleton,
Marine families can send
their children
to high quality on-base
child development centers.
And not just at Camp Pendleton.
The same is available to
every branch of the military,
to all military personnel
regardless of rank.
Show daddy!
Narrator:
Here fees are based
on a sliding scale.
Man:
We looked at everything
from a nanny to a daycare
out in town.
We wouldn't have been
able to afford it.
Our non-military friends,
they're amazed that we only
pay what we pay.
Woman:
Hi, Caleb! Hi, Caleb!
What is that?
(baby vocalizes)
Narrator:
Childcare workers
receive continuous training
and here they are paid
about 50% more
than the national
civilian median.
Woman:
We also have our
child assessment portfolio.
And we communicate daily
with our parents.
Are you guys all going
down for naps?
Narrator:
All centers undergo
regular surprise inspections.
And most all are accredited.
Here we go.
Would you like to be covered?
Narrator:
But it wasn't always this way.
In 1982, a scathing report
found that
the military's childcare
was among the worst
in the nation.
So in 1989,
18 years after the CCDA would
have become law for civilians,
Congress passed the Military
Child Care Act.
Military childcare is now
widely recognized
as among the best
in the nation.
Give me a kiss.
Woman:
I don't know if I could
transition them into
a civilian CDC after being here.
I don't think anything
can compare
to the care you get here.
There we go!
Narrator:
If we as a nation
can support the families who
protect our national security,
why not our civilian workforce
which protects
our national prosperity
and their children who will
advance our future health,
equity and success?
Big jump!
I didn't need your help!
Dugger:
We talk about people
should be able to succeed
on their own.
This is what this country's
all about.
But we make it very,
very difficult
for most of our population.
Boynton-Jarrett:
Parents are working really hard
to care for their children,
to support their families,
to be engaged
and productive citizens
and members of the community.
At the same point in time,
it can be like the dice
are loaded against them.
Dugger:
The set of workforce policies
we now have in place are
a crushing burden on parents.
Narrator:
Maintaining family
and work-life balance is one
of American parents'
greatest stressors.
DaNayah?
Narrator:
With the overwhelming majority
of our youngest children
living in households
where all resident adults work,
this is a critical concern.
Woman:
I work 40 hours a week.
Leroy works sometimes
60 hours a week.
He works a split shift,
so like 2:00 in the afternoon
to about...
When I'm done.
1:00, 2:00 in the morning.
Narrator:
Leroy is a driver and mechanic.
Erica, a nurse.
than most all
of our peer nations.
In today's day,
we all gotta work.
I can remember back
in like my grandfather's days,
the men work,
the ladies, the women stay home
and take care of the house
and family things like that.
In today's day,
it surely can't happen.
Everybody's gotta go
and work
and, you know
what I'm saying, bring it in.
Narrator:
A growing percentage
of Americans work unreliable,
precarious schedules,
which can change
from week to week
depending on
employers' demands.
I do rotating nights,
so I'm on nights this week,
so then next week
though I'll be on days.
So it kind of balances
out that way...
Da-da!
Boynton-Jarrett:
Parents are juggling, shifting,
trying to balance a variety
of competing demands
that there just don't seem like
there are easy
or reasonable solutions.
It leads to a level
of tension and stress.
Is this what we've decided
as a society,
that this degree of tension,
these complex trade-offs
are the norm, to be expected,
just a part of raising a child?
Narrator:
America's work policies
fail to offer relief.
The United States
is the only rich nation
that does not guarantee by law
a single paid vacation day
or holiday.
Erica:
My mom still works
40 hours a week.
But she helps out when she can.
She's a little active for me
to leave her with her now.
But I also have a sister
who has two boys
and she's totally stepped
up to the plate.
That helped a lot.
If I'm not there,
I'm entrusting someone else
to keep her safe, to teach her,
to help her grow in all areas,
developmental^, spiritually.
We have that,
I call it "the village."
If they laugh at me at work,
they're like,
"Who has the baby?"
I'm like,
"Someone in the village!"
That kind of thing,
because we can't do it alone.
Do you want to
go far out?
Yeah, all the way.
Up, up, and up.
Shonkoff:
Nobody does this alone.
Nobody does this in isolation.
The environment that
the family lives in matters.
Boynton-Jarrett:
Neighborhoods may simply
not have an adequate
opportunity structure
to support the families
optimally
and the children optimally.
Narrator:
Erica, Leroyand DeNayah
live in the Boston neighborhood
of Mattapan...
Erica:
You made it?
Yeah!
Narrator:
...which has struggled
with disinvestment and racial
segregation for decades.
Here unemployment is more
than twice the national average.
The banks have thrown
500 homes into foreclosure.
(car horn)
One in five adults here reports
living in persistent sadness.
Powell:
Some people live
in neighborhoods where there
are not good schools,
where there's no tax base,
that's the structure
that they live in
and when we look at how we've
structured race in America,
blacks and Latinos
are more likely
to live in those structures.
And if you live
in that structure,
your life outcomes
are severely truncated.
We know that if we take
the same family
and expose them to
high opportunity areas,
the kids will do better.
Heckman:
What we've seen
is a tremendous disparity,
a growing disparity
between the haves
and the have-nots,
and with it, disparities in the
environments of the children,
so for the next generation,
so it looks bad.
And the problem is
that if we don't address
those inequalities,
we're gonna find ourselves
living with the consequences
of those inequalities.
(siren)
Woman:
Thank you!
Come on, girls.
Narrator:
Those who suffer most
from this systemic inequality
are the one in four American
children born into poverty.
Brrr. It's cold out, huh?
Narrator:
Ashley's children,
Amelia and London,
are among them.
Ashley:
I'm definitely struggling,
but people tell me,
"You're not poor, you're broke,
you're not poor."
Powell:
Because we're individualistic,
when we see poor people,
we're more likely to think,
"It's their fault."
Europe tends to think
if you're poor, it's bad luck
and there's
a structural problem.
The United States tends
to think if you're poor,
it's your problem.
Narrator:
Ashley and her daughters
live on $1,100amonth,
about $13,000 a year,
well below the poverty line.
This is the public assistance
Ashley relies on
because she's unable
to work due to illness-
and it's not enough.
Ashley:
My food stamps last me
about three weeks.
I go through my house
and I sell what I can,
anything that I can
do to get money.
Everybody thinks that
you get state assistance,
well, you're just lazy
and you don't want to work.
That's not the case
for the majority
and that's sure not
the case forme.
Narrator:
Ashley became a single mother
and fell into poverty
when she left her husband.
Ashley:
When Amelia was 3 months old,
he became physically
abusive towards me.
Amelia, what's this one?
No hitting.
Yeah.
Ashley:
Amelia was present
during all of the assaults
and was right next tome.
Amelia:
Stay with mommy!
Stay with mommy.
Narrator:
She was pregnant
with her second daughter,
London.
Ashley:
While I was working,
I ended up going
into pre-term labor
because I had a large
uterine tear
from him kicking me
down the stairs
and kicking me
in the stomach.
And she made it,
but she was six weeks early
and during my over twelve-week
stint of being hospitalized,
I did a Family Medical Leave,
but those are only good
for 12 weeks.
And then when that ended,
my job told me I had taken up
too much time
and they just didn't
have use for me.
And they let me go.
So I was here with two children
and no job.
It's been one thing
after another, unfortunately.
Mom! Where's my
butterfly nightlight?
Hey, I found it!
Narrator:
The US child poverty rate
ranks 34th among 35 nations,
with only Romania behind us.
(child cries)
Ashley:
I'm running out
of things to sell...
I just worry how am
I going to pay my bills.
How am I gonna to
take care of everything
that they need?
If I'm stressed, when I'm
feeling upset or feeling down,
they're really good, I think,
about sensing it.
Because they'll come up
and they'll give me a hug
or my daughter London,
she'll come up and she'll
tell me she loves me.
And I worry every day
if that's going to affect them.
This one.
Shonkoff:
There are many
low-income families
who do a magnificent job
raising their children.
That's sharing, right?
London:
Sharing.
Shonkoff:
It's the pile up-
low education on top
of low income
on top of exposure to violence -
the cumulative burden
of all of those forces
create a sense
of chronic crisis,
chronic activation
of the stress system,
what we call toxic stress.
Narrator:
The Wisconsin study found
that stress experienced
even by middle-class parents
can alter the architecture
of their childrens1
developing brains.
When parents are poor
and struggling,
the stress and anxiety they
experience can be even greater.
And so can the possible
impact on their children.
Burgh y:
Why is mom upset?
Now why are mom
and dad yelling?
have any food?
You have all of these
things going on
that you don't really have
anymore cognitive
or physical energy to
deal with anything else.
No...
I can't find it!
You'll find one.
We all gotta Undone
eventually.
Your turn, Mia.
Ashley:
Amelia is so bright.
She's just hilarious
and London is also so funny...
and so adorable!
But, but she is facing
her own struggles.
She's dealing
with hypersensitivity.
Stop!
Amelia,
you're upsetting her.
Ashley:
If you look at her
the wrong way, she'll cry.
If you tell her to
wait a minute,
hold on, one second, she'll
Oh, so close!
I told you I can't find it!
Narrator:
Children who have faced
the uncertainty of poverty
and other adversities
may often have
a hair-trigger stress response.
Being constantly on alert makes
sense in a precarious world.
But it has consequences.
No, don't get mad.
No. No, no, no.
Boynton-Jarrett:
The adaptation of the individual
is functional for dealing
with those adversities,
but comes at the expense
of your ability
to then engage in other things,
to learn productively
in your environment,
to engage with others
or form relationships.
So it comes at a cost.
The biggest question is
what do we do after a child
has faced an adversity
and what are we doing
to prevent future adversities.
Ashley:
I'd like to think
they're doing really well.
I worry every day that
I may not be enough for them.
I worry, are they happy?
Do they feel enough love?
I'm trying my best to give them
everything that I can.
If I could give them more,
I would.
It's hard.
Boynton-Jarrett:
The brain has the ability
to continue to grow
and develop.
It also has the ability to heal.
If we can create a reliable,
structured social environment
that is safe and secure,
the capacity of the brain
and the human spirit
to continue
and thrive and develop
is beyond what any of us
could predict.
Shonkoff:
What do we all want
for our children?
We want them to
be healthy and thriving.
We want them to be growing
and learning
and being all they can be.
My name starts with an "A."
That's right!
We want them to be happy.
(baby laughs)
What could we be doing
to strengthen the capacity
of everyone who interacts
with children
to be able to provide more
of what they need?
What could we do
to be smarter?
Dugger:
Smart societies look ahead
and if they see a cliff,
they turn the car
and drive this way.
They don't need the accident
to teach them,
"need to turn the car,
need to change direction."
We know we got a crisis,
but we're choosing to try
to perpetuate the old way
of doing things.
We've got to make
different choices.
Shonkoff:
How can we strengthen families?
Where's my other child?
there you are.
How could we strengthen
What kind of role could
business play
to help support the family life
of the people
who work for them?
There's a policy gap
in this country...
Woman:
How many signatures
do you have?
We've got more than
46,000 signatures...
Shonkoff:
Instead of blaming
government programs
we ought to say,
"How could we do a better job?"
What do you want to
be when you grow up?
A fireman!
So you want to help people?
Boynton-Jarrett:
There is strong
and overwhelming evidence that's
all saying the same thing.
Investing early in the lives
of all children
is not only cost-effective
for the whole society,
but improves well-being
for all members of society.
OK...
We're making a house!
Do you want to help us?
powell:
If we worked out the problem
of actually being inclusive
and fair for all children
in terms of their productivity
as future workers
and their productivity
as future citizens
and members of society,
America would explode
in terms of creativity,
in terms of growth,
in terms of ingenuity.
If we play with a full deck,
this country would explode.
Terry:
If you think about our future
and what America's going
to look like,
this is the future right here.
Invest in their parents.
Invest in these children.
(baby vocalizes)
They're not going to fail you,
but we can't fail them now.
Major funding
for this program
was provided by:
Additional funding provided by: